Relations reordering: Dev docs updates - alternative (#1341)
strapi/documentation: docs/developer-docs/latest/developer-resources/database-apis-reference/rest/relations.md

---
title: Reordering relations
description: Use the REST API to manage the order of relations
canonicalUrl: https://docs.strapi.io/developer-docs/latest/developer-resources/database-apis-reference/rest/relations-reordering.html
---

<style lang="scss" scoped>
@media (min-width: 1536px) {
  .custom-block.api-call > .response {
    flex: 0 0 32%;
  }
}
</style>

# Managing relations through the REST API <BetaBadge />

Relations between content-types can be managed through the [admin panel](/user-docs/latest/content-manager/managing-relational-fields.md#managing-multiple-choices-relational-fields) or through [REST](/developer-docs/latest/developer-resources/database-apis-reference/rest-api.md) requests sent to the Content API.

> Relations can be added, updated, or removed through the Content API by passing parameters in the body of the request:

Reviewer: Can we be more consistent with the naming of the API here? 
```suggestion
Relations can be connected, updated, or disconnected through the Content API by passing parameters in the body of the request:
```

Author: I'm definitely for more consistency, but I was wondering: is it obvious to everyone that "connecting" a relation and "adding" it is the same? I was not sure, so I decided to use the "simpler" wording first. WDYT?

Edit: Seeing your other suggestions in combination with this one makes sense, I'm just still wondering what is the easiest to understand: "add a relation" or "connect an entity"? 🤔

Reviewer: For me a relation is a connection between two entities - in that sense you are *creating* a connection between two things. With this mindset it is more about "creating/ connecting" entities rather than "adding" relations (where are they being added to?).

But I don't have a strong opinion on that.

Does it make sense to have a look at https://www.prisma.io/docs/concepts/components/prisma-schema/relations? They were our source when deciding on the naming.

Author: Thanks for the useful link! I will read it carefully 👀

Reviewer 2: I am wondering the same. At some point we have to explain connecting = adding a relation, that place could be in the table below.

Also connecting actually means adding & updating. So if we were going to rephrase it could be more like:
> Relations can be connected, disconnected or set through the Content API by passing parameters in the body of the request:

Reviewer 2: One option we are missing in this list is not using any of `connect` `disconnect` `set` attributes. You can create relations by passing an array of numbers:

```js
{
  data:  {
		categories: [2, 4]
  }
}
```

If we decide to mention here, I think keeping the `added, updated, removed `would be more appropiace

Reviewer: @Marc-Roig What do you think about saying we are connecting one/ more entities with each other? I find that pretty clear, but I don't have a very strong opinion either ...

Reviewer 2: @gu-stav I do like that wording indeed. :) That sounds clear and is coherent with the naming we are using.

|  Parameter name | Description | Type of update |
|-----------------|------------------|----------------|

> | [`connect`](#connect)       | Adds relation(s).<br /><br />Can be used in combination with `disconnect`.<br /><br />Can be used with [positional arguments](#relations-reordering) to define an order for relations.    | Partial

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [`connect`](#connect)       | Connects new entities.<br /><br />Can be used in combination with `disconnect`.<br /><br />Can be used with [positional arguments](#relations-reordering) to define an order for relations.    | Partial
```

Reviewer 2: Just as a note, in the future we might add the option the create an entity and connect it at the same time. So I think it makes sense to say `Connects new entities` here.

> | [`disconnect`](#disconnect)    | Removes relation(s).<br /><br />Can be used in combination with `connect`. | Partial

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [`disconnect`](#disconnect)    | Disconnects entities.<br /><br />Can be used in combination with `connect`. | Partial
```

> | [`set`](#set)           | Sets relations, replacing all the existing ones.<br /><br />Must be used alone.  | Full

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [`set`](#set)           | Set entities to a specific set. Using `set` will overwrite all existing connections to other entities.<br /><br />It can not be used in combination with `connect` or `disconnect`.  | Full
```

> Using `connect` allows adding [positional arguments](#relations-reordering) to define an order for relations.

Reviewer: This is also true for disconnect. I think we could remove that sentence and elaborate on the behavior later on. Wdyt?

Author: There was no information about this in the Notion document I received 😅 Can we use `disconnect` with `position`? What would be the point? Could you please give me some examples? Thank you :)

Reviewer: Ah no, you are right.

<br/>

## `connect`

Using `connect` in the body of a request performs a partial update, adding specified relations.

`connect` accepts either a shorthand or a longhand syntax.

| Syntax type | Syntax example |
| ------------|----------------|

> | shorthand   | `connect: [2, 4]`

Reviewer: How could we explain that we are referring to entity ids here?

Author: Good point, I'll improve this :)

> | longhand    | ```connect: [ {id: 2}, {id: 4} ]``` |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| longhand    | ```connect: [{ id: 2 }, { id: 4 }]``` |
```

You can also use the longhand syntax to [reorder relations](#relations-reordering).

`connect` can be used in combination with [`disconnect`](#disconnect).

<br />

:::::: tabs card

::::: tab Shorthand syntax example

::: request Example request using the shorthand syntax

`PUT http://localhost:1337/api/restaurants/1`

```json
{
  data: {
    categories: { 
      connect: [2, 4],
    }
  }
}
```

:::

:::::

::::: tab Longhand syntax example

::: request Example request using the longhand syntax

`PUT http://localhost:1337/api/restaurants/1`

```json
{
  data: {
    categories: { 
      connect: [
        { id: 2 },
        { id: 4 }
      ], 
    }
  }
}
```

:::

:::::
::::::

> ### Relations reordering

Reviewer: I find it a bit confusing this is nested into `connect`. What do you think about explaining the positional syntax outside of the `connect` / `disconnect` methods, because it applies to both of them?

Positional arguments can be passed to the longhand syntax of `connect` to define the order of relations.

> The longhand syntax accepts an array of objects, each object containing the `id` of the relation to be connected and an optional `position` object to define where to connect the relation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The longhand syntax accepts an array of objects, each object containing the `id` of the entry to be connected and an optional `position` object to define where to add the relation.
```

:::

To define the `position` for a relation, pass one of the following 4 different positional attributes:

| Parameter name and syntax | Description                                                            | Type       |
| ------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------- |
| `before: id`              | Positions the relation before the given `id`.                          | Entry `id` |
| `after: id`               | Positions the relation after the given `id`.                           | Entry `id` |
| `start: true`             | Positions the relation at the start of the existing list of relations. | Boolean    |
| `end: true`               | Positions the relation at the end of the existing list of relations.   | Boolean    |

The `position` argument is optional and defaults to `position: { end: true }`.

:::note Sequential order
Since `connect` is an array, the order of operations is important as they will be treated sequentially (see combined example below).
:::

> ::::: tabs card

Reviewer 4: I think the database record examples are the same for each example? If so, it might help to put them above the tabs card.

Author: Interesting. Indeed these are the same, but I designed the tabs' content to be read independently and from start to finish. I thought it could be confusing to have the "context" of an example outside the example 🤔 WDYT?

:::: tab Basic example

Consider the following record in the database:

```json
categories: [
  { id: 1, order: 1 }
  { id: 2, order: 2 }
]
```

> Sending the following request updates a `restaurant` entry and creates a third relation of `id` `3` for the `categories` attribute and position it before the relation with `id` `2`:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Sending the following request updates a `restaurant` entry and creates a third relation of `id` `3` for the `categories` attribute and positions it before the relation with `id` `2`:
```

::: request Example request to update the position of one relation

`PUT http://localhost:1337/api/restaurants/1`

```json
{
  data: {
    categories: {
      connect: [
        { id: 3, position: { before: 2 } },
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

:::
::::

:::: tab Combined example

Consider the following record in the database:

```json
categories: [
  { id: 1, order: 1 }
  { id: 2, order: 2 }
]
```

Sending the following example in the request body of a PUT request updates multiple relations:

::: request Example request to reorder several relations

`PUT http://localhost:1337/api/restaurants/1`

```json
{
  data: {
    categories: {
      connect: [
        { id: 6, position: { after: 1} },
        { id: 7, position: { before: 2 } },
        { id: 8, position: { end: true } },
        { id: 9 },

>         { id: 10, position: { start: true } },

Reviewer 2: I don't know if it's worth mentioning, but the same relation should not be connected more than once.
That would return a Validation error by the API.

      ]
    }
  }
}
```

:::

> Omitting the `position` argument defaults (as in `id: 9` defaults to `position: { end: true }`. All other relations are positioned relative to another existing `id` (using `after` or `before`) or relative to the list of relations (using `start` or `end`). Operations are treated sequentially, in the order defined in the `connect` array, so the resulting database record will be the following:

Reviewer: I find this information very relevant: Omitting the `position` argument defaults (as in `id: 9` defaults to `position: { end: true }`.

Can we move that a bit up where we explain the syntax?

Author: Thanks for the feedback. We already do mention it before, please check above examples: 🙂 
![Screenshot 2022-12-13 at 14 06 29](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/4233866/207326163-4cd60977-f333-4217-a8bd-6612dd655e41.png)

Reviewer: Ah right - thanks. I didn't see that!

```json
categories: [
  { id: 10, order: 1 },
  { id: 1, order: 2 },
  { id: 6, order: 3 },
  { id: 7, order: 4 },
  { id: 2, order: 5 },
  { id: 8, order: 6 },

>   { id: 9, order: 7 }

Reviewer: What do you think about shortening this a bit? I believe 3 / 4 items would be sufficient ...

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. However, I think that all of these items are important because, unless I'm missing something, they illustrate the complete result of all the operations described above:
![Screenshot 2022-12-13 at 14 10 41](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/4233866/207326831-696888d5-5310-4bec-b201-300c617ad5cb.png)
This ordering part is a bit complex and with @Marc-Roig we discussed the importance of highlighting the different use cases. What do you think?

Reviewer 2: There is the short example where you can see the basics of connect and disconnect syntax and then you have the more extensive one where you see all positional arguments used at once.

I would live this list with all the items, maybe what we can remove is the order attribute, which is something the API user will not see. It might seem smaller that way.

Something like:
```js
categories: [
  { id: 10 },
  { id: 1 },
  { id: 6 },
  { id: 7 },
  { id: 2 },
  { id: 8 },
  { id: 9 }
]
 
```

wdt? @pwizla @gu-stav

Author: I like your suggestion, Marc! WDYT, Gustav?

Reviewer: Sounds good to me :)

]
```

::::

:::::

## `disconnect`

Using `disconnect` in the body of a request performs a partial update, removing specified relations.

`disconnect` accepts either a shorthand or a longhand syntax.

| Syntax type | Syntax example |
| ------------|----------------|
| shorthand   | `disconnect: [2, 4]`

> | longhand    | ```disconnect: [ {id: 2}, {id: 4} ]``` |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| longhand    | ```disconnect: [{ id: 2 }, { id: 4 }]``` |
```

`disconnect` can be used in combination with [`connect`](#connect).

<br />

:::::: tabs card

::::: tab Shorthand syntax example

::: request Example request using the shorthand syntax

`PUT http://localhost:1337/api/restaurants/1`

```json
{
  data: {
    categories: { 
      disconnect: [2, 4],
    }
  }
}
```

:::

:::::

::::: tab Longhand syntax example

::: request Example request using the longhand syntax

`PUT http://localhost:1337/api/restaurants/1`

```json
{
  data: {
    categories: { 
      disconnect: [
        { id: 2 },
        { id: 4 }
      ], 
    }
  }
}
```

:::

:::::
::::::

## `set`

Using `set` performs a full update, replacing all existing relations with the ones specified, in the order specified.

`set` accepts a shorthand or a longhand syntax.

| Syntax type | Syntax example                  |
| ----------- | ------------------------------- |
| shorthand   | `set: [2, 4]`                   |

> | longhand    | ```set: [ {id: 2}, {id: 4} ]``` |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| longhand    | ```set: [{ id: 2 }, { id: 4 }]``` |
```

As `set` replaces all existing relations, it should not be used in combination with other parameters. To perform a partial update, use [`connect`](#connect) and [`disconnect`](#disconnect).

::: note Omitting set
Omitting any parameter is equivalent to using `set`.<br/>For instance, the following 3 syntaxes are all equivalent:

> - `data: { categories: set: [ {id: 2}, {id: 4} ] }}`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `data: { categories: set: [{ id: 2 }, { id: 4 }] }}`
```
